Direct Auth concept (#5560)
okta/okta-developer-docs: packages/@okta/vuepress-site/docs/concepts/direct-authentication/index.md

### Provides more control

Direct auth gives you more control over the authentication process by handling authentication internally in your app. You can tailor security measures to your needs without relying on third-party providers. Keep in mind that this also places a greater responsibility on you to ensure the secure handling of user credentials. Use direct authentication only in situations where there's a high degree of trust between the user and your app.

## Key Characteristics

Direct authentication stands apart from traditional methods due to several defining characteristics that streamline the user experience and simplify implementation in specific scenarios:

> * **Client-initiated credential exchange**: The client app directly sends user credentials (for example, username/password, API key, token) to the service's authentication endpoint.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Client-initiated credential exchange**: The client app directly sends user credentials (for example, username/password, OTPs and Okta Verify prompts) to the authorization server's token endpoint.
```

* **API-centric**: Authentication is typically performed using RESTful APIs.

> * **Minimal redirection**: The need for browser redirects to IdPs is reduced or eliminated. This keeps the user within the app's context.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Browserless**: There is not need to authenticate through a front-channel browser flow. This keeps the user within the app's context.
```

external IDPs are not related to DA really

> * **Direct response**: The authentication service directly responds to the client with an authentication token (for example, JWT or OAuth token) upon successful validation.

Reviewer: I think this line can be removed. Other apis also just return tokens as well. If you do decide to keep it, the only thing returned is OAuth/OIDC tokens

* **Enhanced user experience**: The sign-in experience is faster, more fluid, and less disruptive.

## How it Works

At a high level, the direct auth flow has the following steps:

1. Your client app prompts the user for their credentials (username and password) and then with an authenticator, if required.

> 2. The user enters their credentials in the app (for example, mobile app, web form), and then addresses an authenticator prompt in the app, if required.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. The user enters their credentials in the app (for example, mobile app, web form).
```

3. Your app builds the API request that contains these credentials and sends it directly to the Okta  `/token` endpoint.

    **Note**: This is a high-level example. There are other requests and responses that can occur between your app, the user, and Okta. This depends on the types of authenticators that you configure. See [Configure Direct Authentication](/docs/guides/configure-direct-auth-grants/aotp/main/) for example authenticator flows that Okta supports.

> 4. Okta receives the request and validates the credentials. If validation is successful, Okta generates and returns an access token to your app.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Okta receives the request and validates the credentials. If validation is successful and the application's assurance requirements are met, Okta generates and returns an access token to your app. Otherwise, Okta responds saying more assurance is needed.
```

5. Your app securely stores the token and uses it for subsequent authenticated API requests to Okta.

> ### Comparison with traditional authentication methods

Reviewer: I would remove this whole section. There is some stuff in here that is not accurate and I think by the time we edit it down to what is correct, it will just be the same as the `Key Characteristics` section

* **Traditional Authentication**: Relies on third-party identity providers, which can limit control over the authentication experience and security practices

**Security responsibility**:

* **Direct authentication**: Places the responsibility of security on app developers, who must ensure secure handling of user credentials
* **Traditional authentication**: Distributes security responsibilities across multiple identity providers, potentially reducing the burden on individual apps

**Latency**:

* **Direct authentication**: Reduces latency by eliminating the need for network hops associated with redirects to identity providers
* **Traditional authentication**: Can introduce delays due to the multiple steps involved in redirecting to and from identity providers

**Use cases**:

* **Direct authentication**: Best suited for apps where speed and simplicity are critical, such as mobile apps and single-page apps
* **Traditional authentication**: More appropriate for scenarios that require federated identity management and Single Sign-On (SSO) capabilities across multiple apps

## Disadvantages and considerations

> * **Increased security responsibility**: The client app and backend service bear more direct responsibility for secure credential handling (storage, transmission, validation).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Increased security responsibility**: The client app and backend service bear more direct responsibility for secure credential handling (storage and transmission).
```

* **Credential exposure risk**: If not implemented carefully, direct transmission of credentials can increase the risk of interception or compromise. Strong encryption (TLS/SSL) is mandatory.

> * **Complexity for federation**: Less suitable for scenarios requiring complex federated identity management across multiple distinct services or organizations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Complexity**: The extra control given to the client comes at the cost of more complexity for the client. Unlike other authentication flows, where Okta drives the flow based on policy requirements until the user is authenticated, the client decides how to authenticate the user but must know how to do so in a way that satisfies that application's requirements.
* **Unsupported factors**: Not all authenticator types supported by Okta are supported on direct auth yet.
```

> * **Lack of SSO (Out-of-the-Box**): Doesn't inherently provide SSO across disparate apps without more customization.

Reviewer: not really sure what this means. Think we can remove it

* **Compliance**: May require careful consideration of compliance with various security and privacy regulations (for example, GDPR, HIPAA) regarding direct credential handling.

## Security best practices

Implementing direct authentication requires strict adherence to security best practices to mitigate inherent risks:

> * **Always use HTTPS/TLS**: Encrypt all communication between the client and Okta.

Reviewer: Similar to above: this is true, but I think is true of all okta apis. I don't think we allow non-ssl requests

* **Secure credential storage**: Never store raw passwords on the client-side. Use secure methods for storing tokens (for example, platform-specific secure storage).
* **Hashing passwords**: Store user passwords on the server using strong, industry-standard hashing algorithms.
* **Rate limiting and account lockout**: Implement mechanisms to prevent brute-force attacks and credential stuffing.
* **Token security**: Use short-lived access tokens, implement refresh tokens, and ensure secure token invalidation.

> * **Input validation**: Strictly validate all input received from the client to prevent injection attacks.

Reviewer: just checking is this supposed to be token validation or invalidation?

* **Auditing and logging**: Maintain comprehensive audit logs of all authentication attempts.

## Conclusion

> Direct authentication offers a powerful approach to optimizing the user sign-in experience for specific application contexts that prioritizes speed and simplicity. While it provides significant advantages in terms of user experience and control, it also places a greater responsibility on developers to implement robust security measures. When carefully designed and implemented with a strong focus on security, direct authentication is a highly effective and preferred method for seamless user access.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Direct authentication offers a powerful approach to optimizing the user sign-in experience for specific application contexts that prioritizes client control and minimizing browser interactions. While it provides significant advantages in terms of control, it also places a greater responsibility on developers to implement robust security measures.
```

I removed the part about it being preferred. I don't think it is prefered to SiW where that can be used. It is prefered over attempting to directly use the IDX APIs though

---
title: Direct authentication
meta:
  - name: description
    content: An overview of what direct authentication is and how you can use it.
---

# Direct authentication

<!-- Direct authentication simplifies the authentication flow, enhances user experience by minimizing redirects, and provides developers with greater control over security measures. -->
## What is Direct authentication

> [Direct authentication](/docs/guides/configure-direct-auth-grants/aotp/main/) provides a set of [authentication APIs](https://developer.okta.com/docs/api/openapi/okta-oauth/oauth/tag/CustomAS/#tag/CustomAS/operation/tokenCustomAS). These APIs allow a client to directly verify authentication factors for a user in exchange for OAuth 2.0 tokens. The client does this without needing to interact with the Sign-In Widget in a browser.

Reviewer: I'm wondering if the `authentication APIs` link is confusing. It brings you to the custom AS token endpoint, which is one of the multiple authentication apis it could link to. Could just unlink but I do see why you chose this one

Author: I wondered, too. I think I'll take it out.

> [Direct authentication](/docs/guides/configure-direct-auth-grants/aotp/main/) provides a set of [authentication APIs](https://developer.okta.com/docs/api/openapi/okta-oauth/oauth/tag/CustomAS/#tag/CustomAS/operation/tokenCustomAS). These APIs allow a client to directly verify authentication factors for a user in exchange for OAuth 2.0 tokens. The client does this without needing to interact with the Sign-In Widget in a browser.

Author: yeah, it's something that we've been discussing. I will have some changes coming for that whole guide to address this issue and others. It's the next doc I'm working on. Thanks!

This is useful for apps that need more control over the authentication flow than can be provided through the Sign-In Widget and non-browser apps. Non-browser apps like native apps can't always pop up a browser for authentication or if they can, it creates a negative user experience.

> ### Provides more control

Author: I was dinged by Acrolinx because of how large the section was.

> This is useful for apps that need more control over the authentication flow than can be provided through the Sign-In Widget or non-browser apps. Non-browser apps like native apps can't typically pop up a browser for authentication or if they can, it creates a negative user experience.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is useful for apps that need more control over the authentication flow than can be provided through the Sign-In Widget and non-browser apps. Non-browser apps like native apps can't always pop up a browser for authentication or if they can, it creates a negative user experience.
```

## Key characteristics

Direct authentication stands apart from traditional methods in the following ways:

* **Client-initiated credential exchange**: The client app directly sends user credentials (for example, username/password, OTPs, and Okta Verify prompts) to the authorization server's `/token` endpoint.
* **API-centric**: Authentication is performed using RESTful APIs, not through a browser form like the Sign-In Widget.
* **Browserless**: There's no need to authenticate through a front-channel browser flow. This keeps the user within the app's context.

## How it Works

At a high level, the direct auth flow has the following steps:

1. Your client app prompts the user for a username and any factor verifications of its choosing.
2. The user enters their credentials in the app (for example, mobile app, web form).
3. Your app builds the API request that contains these credentials and sends it directly to the Okta  `/token` endpoint.

>     **Note**: This is a high-level example. There are other requests and responses that can occur between your app, the user, and Okta. This depends on the types of authenticators that you configure. See [Configure Direct Authentication](/docs/guides/configure-direct-auth-grants/aotp/main/) for example authenticator flows that Okta supports.

Reviewer: same comment about wishing we could link to a not OTP specific link
